  ++ N E W   U S E R ' S   G U I D E   T O   Q	++
	    !! DON'T PANIC !!
 The idea behind Q is that what you see on the screen is what goes in the file.
Unlike "full screen" editors, you work on a line of a file at a time. While
working on a line there are no explicit commands but instead characters typed
go straight into the line, overwriting the old ones or being inserted. There
are control characters in lieu of commands to do such things as move to the
part of the line you want to change, tell the editor to insert rather than
overwrite, and others that we needn't go into just yet. There are
conventional-style commands to get to the lines you want to change, or print
out parts of the file.
 GETTING STARTED
 Let's assume yor have a file that you want to amend. Get into Q by typing 'Q
<filename>'. Now by keying 'V', the first 12 lines of the file will be printed.
(V-VIEW prints lines in a file around the current file position). Suppose line
five is wrong. Type 'M5' and you are modifying line 5.
 More HELP topics:
 H IQ	/* Invoking Q from the command shell - the full works
 H V	/* More info on V-VIEW
 H M	/* More info on M-MODIFY

 Changing part of a line but not altering its length

 (Notation: '^<char>' means 'control-key<char>'.) Now you are modifying line 5
(following on from the example in the first part of the guide), move the cursor
on the screen to the part you want to change, then type over the old part with
what you want instead (assuming it's the same length) then the amended line is
accepted by keying carriage return (C/R, RETURN &c.).
 To move the cursor: ^X moves it to the right, ^Y to the left. So at the start
of a line you can just key enough ^X's to get where you want. You'll probably
find this a little slow and tedious besides: there are much faster ways of
moving the cursor but they'll be detailed later.
 Time for some revision: the cursor, in case you hadn't guessed , is the
underline or rectangle or whatever (possibly flashing) that indicates where on
the line the next character that you key is going to go. To move it - ^X or ^Y
(for right or left). To change text - overtype new onto old. Key carriage
return when finished with line.
 Relevant help topics			H C-Y
 H C-X					H CP   /* If you're adventurous
 H C-M

 Inserting or deleting parts of a line

 Ok, now you can move the cursor to wherever you want - laboriously it's true
but we'll fix that in the next instalment - and overwrite existing text. You
may have noticed that you can lengthen a line by typing beyond its current end.
 To insert text in the middle of a line, move the cursor so it's at the
character before which you want to insert, then key ^E. Now whatever you key is
inserted rather than overwriting the existing line, until you key another ^E or
finish with the line (e.g. with C/R). In a line you can key ^E as often as you
like: each time it changes the state of inserting:- from overwriting to
inserting or vice versa. ^X and ^Y (also the other cursor controls we haven't
covered yet) still work when inserting: give it a try and see for yourself!
 To delete: if there's a number of consecutive characters in a line that you
want to delete (e.g. a word of text), move the cursor to the first char you
don't want, then key a ^D to delete it, and more ^D's for the following chars.
The RUBOUT key also deletes, but it removes the character preceding the cursor,
(often the one you've just typed) so it's mainly useful for correcting typing
errors when inserting, or creating new lines (not covered yet). ^Y is usually
more useful after errors when overwriting text. H
C-E				      H C-D H RUB

 Faster ways of moving the cursor

 To get immediately to the next occurrence on the line of any particular
character, key ^G followed by the character. E.g. to get to the next single
quote, key ^G'. ^G goes to the end of the line if the character is not found.
 To get back to the start of the line, key ^H. To get to the end, key ^Z.
 If you think of the line as text with 'words' seperated by spaces then:-
 ^F gets you to the next 'word'
 ^B gets you back to the start of this 'word' or the previous one if you were
already at the start of this one. Also relevant are the following:
 H DY		     H C-G		 H C-H		     H C-Z
 H C-F		     H C-B
 H SC /* The complete list of control characters
 The continuation of the Guide is still in preparation
