.\"
.\" qm manual page.
.\" Copyright (c) 2020 Duncan Roe
.\"
.\" Original author: Duncan Roe
.\"
.\" This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify
.\" it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
.\" the Free Software Foundation; either version 2, or (at your option)
.\" any later version.
.\"
.\" This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.\" but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\" MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
.\" GNU General Public License for more details.
.\"
.\" You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
.\" along with this program; see the file COPYING.  If not, write to
.\" the Free Software Foundation, 59 Temple Place - Suite 330,
.\" Boston, MA 02111-1307, USA.
.\"
.TH qm 1 "Oct 28 2020" "q-56" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.SH NAME
qm \- output current \f3q\f1 macros to stdout
.SH SYNOPSIS
\f3qm\f1 [\f3-a\f1] [\f2file\f1|\f2directory\f1]
.SH DESCRIPTION
With no arguments, \f3qm\f1 displays the macro set that \f3q\f1 would load if
run in the current working directory.
.br
With \f2directory\f1, \f3qm\f1 displays the macro set that \f3q\f1 would load if
run in \f2directory\f1.
.br
With \f2file\f1, \f3qm\f1 displays the macro set that \f3q\f1 would load using
\f2file\f1 as its startup file.
.RE
.SH OPTIONS
.TP 4
.BI \-a
Use \f3a\f1lternative output format.
.RS 6
Without \f3\-a\f1, macros 1 - 77 (octal) are output as themselves.
E.g. macro 1,
which the user would invoke by keying \f3^N^A\f1 (Control-N Control-A),
is displayed on a line starting
"\f3^A : \f1".
This changes to "\f3001 \f1" with \f3\-a\f1.
Higher-numbered macros are always displayed numerically.
.SH SEE ALSO
q(1), q_macros(5), q_opcodes(5)
.SH AUTHOR
Written by Duncan Roe
